New finalize method post (#271)
conan-io/conan-io.github.io: _posts/2024-09-03-New-finalize-method.markdown

cache but before it is used by consumers. This allows you to implement logic to
locally copy or generate files without affecting the original package. For
instance:

```py
from conan import ConanFile
from conan.tools.files import copy
import os

class Package(ConanFile):
    def package(self):
        copy(self, "*", src=self.source_folder, dst=os.path.join(self.package_folder, "bin"))

    def finalize(self):
        copy(self, "*", src=self.immutable_package_folder, dst=self.package_folder)
```

In this example we introduce a new class attribute, ``immutable_package_folder``.
This attribute will always point to the ``self.package_folder`` that is used in the ``package()`` method.

When a package which declares a ``finalize()`` method is consumed, the
``package_folder`` of that package will no longer point to the previous path, but
a new path which follows this structure in the cache
“\<conan\_cache\>/p/b/\<build\_id\>/f”. This folder will not be tracked for
integrity so any alteration on this path will be transparent for conan.

This is why in the ``finalize()`` method we must ensure all the needed files

> installed in the ``immutable_package_folder`` are also **copied** or **linked**

Reviewer: When you say "linked," could you explain exactly what you mean?

Author: Inside finalize method, the creator of the package must ensure the contents of `package_folder` generated in `package`  are copied to the new folder. This copy could be raw copy or could be whatever the user decide. 
If the package is Qt and os is linux, it could be convenient to make a symlink instead of a raw copy to save storage and time.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we want to recommend this? Symlinks are always problematic, and maybe in the end you could end up modifying the immutable folder in some way if you are symlinking? Is that tested? That's something that @memsharded and @AbrilRBS will know better than me.

Reviewer 2: yes, I agree this might be problematic. For example if in the python pycache case, files are linking instead of copied, I think it will still corrupt the "immutable-package-folder"?

I'd say remove it at this moment, or clearly clarify that such symlinks (I understand there is a use case to avoid copying the full Qt, doubling the disk space) should guarantee no such issues?

Probably, it should also be clarified in the docs?

Author: Take a look at the new changes, I've added a warning below

to the new ``package_folder``.  
And that is what the example is doing in the last line.

> **Note**: finalize method will only run once per *package\_id*. This means that, if the package is used multiple times, the ``finalize()`` method will only run the first time, so different consumers will use the same *final folder*.

> **Warning**: packages can’t change its "binary" compatibility or footprint in any way. Otherwise, other packages consuming this one will not work when uploaded and reused, because they will depend on a binary that is not uploaded. This feature is intended for customizations of runtime or build utilities to correctly consume the package, build against it and use it at run time.

### Examples

#### Meson cache integrity

Traditionally, maintaining cache integrity during package uploads, especially
for tools like *Meson*, required disabling Python bytecode generation to
prevent cache corruption. However, using ``finalize()``, you can keep Python’s
caching efficiency intact while ensuring that cache integrity is preserved.
Let’s see in deep detail with a typical workflow:

> 1. A package is updated/modified  

Reviewer: Maybe installed would be more precise than updated/modified?
```suggestion
1. A package is installed
```

> 2. The package is tested locally in order to verify the changes are correct. During this step, some cache files could be generated. In the case of “Meson”, ``.pyc``  

Reviewer: Maybe change for something like this? I think that "some cache files could be generated" sounds a bit vague.
```suggestion
2. The package is tested locally in order to verify the changes are correct. During this step, files could be generated in the Conan local cache package folder. In the case of “Meson”, ``.pyc``  
```

> 3. Upload the modified package to a remote. Conan will perform an integrity check on the local cache before uploading the package when called with the ``–check`` flag. This would historically fail because the cache is now “dirty”. Those .``pyc`` files have been created automatically in the ``package_folder`` and Conan caught the mismatch.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Upload the modified package to a remote. Conan will perform an integrity check on the local cache before uploading the package when called with the ``-–check`` argument. This would historically fail because the cache is now “dirty”. Those .``pyc`` files have been created automatically in the ``package_folder`` and Conan caught the mismatch.

```

cache. Remember that this problem did not only affect *Meson* maintainers but
every user who has used the *Meson* build system as a dependency. Without this
tweak, performing a quick ``conan cache check-integrity "meson"`` will fail.

But this still was not a perfect solution as it threw all python caching
efficiency out of the window. This is one of the main reasons for implementing
the ``finalize()`` method. Let’s see how could we modify *Meson* package in order
to keep python’s cache efficiency and cache integrity intact:

&nbsp;1. First we could get rid of the ``PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE`` environment variable because we want python to generate ``.pyc`` files:

```py
def package(self):
    # Create wrapper functions
    save(self, os.path.join(self.package_folder, "bin", "meson"), textwrap.dedent("""\
        #!/usr/bin/env bash
        meson_dir=$(dirname "$0")
        exec "$meson_dir/meson.py" "$@"
    """))
```

&nbsp;2. We need to create a `finalize` method which will copy all contents of the `immutable_package_folder` to the final and isolated `package_folder`

```py
def finalize(self):
    copy(self, "*", src=self.immutable_package_folder, dst=self.package_folder)
```

> As explained above, in the context of the ``finalize()`` method until the consumer, ``self.package_folder`` will now aim to the *final folder*.

Reviewer: I think we may extend this part of the solution a bit, it feels like we are talking more about the old fix than the new feature, explain a bit maybe the order of operations when you add this part.

Author: I've added one more paragraph! There is not really too much to say about this.
And I think that is a good new hehe, not having to do almost anything for this to work is a cool feature.

consumer/1.0: Content in dependency package_folder:
['file1.txt']
consumer/1.0: Dependency immutable_package_folder: /Users/conan/.conan2/p/b/depen856e3d9c06c1f/p
consumer/1.0: Content in dependency immutable_package_folder:
['file2.txt', 'file1.txt', 'conanmanifest.txt', 'conaninfo.txt']
...
consumer/1.0: Generating the package
consumer/1.0: Packaging in folder /Users/conan/.conan2/p/b/consuea78f76f2c500/p
```

As described above, when a consumer access a dependency ``package_folder`` 

```py
self.dependencies["dependency"].package_folder
```

The obtained path will be the *final folder* and not the typical ``/p`` path (the immutable one).  
We can also appreciate that the content of the ``package_folder`` just contains what we explicitly have copied in the ``finalize`` method on the ``dependency`` package.

> **Note**: in most of the cases, consumers will never need to access ``immutable_package_folder``. 

> **Note**: as soon as a ConanFile has defined the ``finalize`` method, no matter if the method is empty, the resulting ``package_folder`` will point to the *final folder* (the one ended with ``/f``)

#### Why ``immutable_package_folder``?

> As the original ``package_folder`` get’s overridden by the *finalize_folder*, without any other property, there could be no way to access the original package folder for a dependency or even inside ``package_info``. 

Reviewer: The folder is called \*final folder\* above, may we use the same way of referring to this folder? I think that \*finalize_folder\* sounds like something that we can access in the recipe, maybe use \*final folder\* or \*finalized folder\* would be more clear?

Author: Oh, that is a mistake, I'll fix it now

> As the original ``package_folder`` get’s overridden by the *finalize_folder*, without any other property, there could be no way to access the original package folder for a dependency or even inside ``package_info``. 

Author: ```suggestion
As the original ``package_folder`` get’s overridden by the *final folder*, without any other property, there could be no way to access the original package folder for a dependency or even inside ``package_info``. 
```

---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Introducing finalize() method: Customizing packages locally"
meta_title: "Introducing finalize() method: Customizing packages locally"

> description: "New conan finalize method which allow preserving immutability and local configurations of packages"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "New conan finalize() method which allows preserving immutability and local configurations of packages"
```

> keywords: "finalize,locall configuration,pycache,pyc,cache integrity"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
keywords: "finalize,local configuration,pycache,pyc,cache integrity"
```

- **Ensuring cache integrity**: Handling files generated during package execution (e.g., *pycache*) in a way that doesn't alter the original package.
- **Local modifications**: Creating or adjusting configuration files necessary for the package to function correctly on the local machine which can’t be achieved at package creation time.

### How ``finalize()`` Works

The ``finalize()`` method is invoked after a package is installed in the local
cache but before it is used by consumers. This allows you to implement logic to
locally copy or generate files without affecting the original package. For
instance:

```py
from conan import ConanFile
from conan.tools.files import copy
import os

class Package(ConanFile):
    def package(self):
        copy(self, "*", src=self.source_folder, dst=os.path.join(self.package_folder, "bin"))

    def finalize(self):
        copy(self, "*", src=self.immutable_package_folder, dst=self.package_folder)
```

In this example we introduce a new class attribute, ``immutable_package_folder``.
This attribute will always point to the original and well known
``package_folder``, which will match this pattern in the cache

> “\<conan\_cache\>/p/b/\<build\_id\>/p”

Reviewer 2: I think the pattern might be avoided, reads a bit more confusing than clarifying.

Instead of this, I think the next paragraph explains it better, so maybe something like "this attribute will always point to the ``self.package_folder`` that is used in the ``package()`` method"

> This attribute will always point to the original and well known
> ``package_folder``, which will match this pattern in the cache
> “\<conan\_cache\>/p/b/\<build\_id\>/p”

Author: ```suggestion
This attribute will always point to the ``self.package_folder`` that is used in the ``package()`` method.
```

### Examples

#### Meson cache integrity

Traditionally, maintaining cache integrity during package uploads, especially
for tools like *Meson*, required disabling Python bytecode generation to
prevent cache corruption. However, using ``finalize()``, you can keep Python’s
caching efficiency intact while ensuring that cache integrity is preserved.
Let’s see in deep detail with a typical workflow:

1. A package is updated/modified  
2. The package is tested locally in order to verify the changes are correct. During this step, some cache files could be generated. In the case of “Meson”, ``.pyc``  
3. Upload the modified package to a remote. Conan will perform an integrity check on the local cache before uploading the package when called with the ``–check`` flag. This would historically fail because the cache is now “dirty”. Those .``pyc`` files have been created automatically in the ``package_folder`` and Conan caught the mismatch.

> This is a simplified version of the current *Meson* package method, where python bytecode generation has been disabled:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a simplified version of the current *Meson* package method, where Python bytecode generation has been disabled:
```

```py
def package(self):
    # Create wrapper functions
    save(self, os.path.join(self.package_folder, "bin", "meson"), textwrap.dedent("""\
        #!/usr/bin/env bash
        meson_dir=$(dirname "$0")
        export PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1
        exec "$meson_dir/meson.py" "$@"
    """))
```

This was a valid solution in order to ensure cache integrity inside the conan
cache. Remember that this problem did not only affect *Meson* maintainers but
every user who has used the *Meson* build system as a dependency. Without this
tweak, performing a quick ``conan cache check-integrity "meson"`` will fail.

But this still was not a perfect solution as it threw all python caching
efficiency out of the window. This is one of the main reasons for implementing

> the ``finalize`` method. Let’s see how could we modify *Meson* package in order

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the ``finalize()`` method. Let’s see how could we modify *Meson* package in order
```
